[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. In this video,
we would like to set out an alternative
framework for the fundamental theorem of
algebra—or actually the fundamental theorems of
algebra that we talked about last time because
there are actually a couple of them that
are closely related. What I want to do is
reposition these actual theorems to be much more
algebraic, to not actually involve any analysis,
at least in their statements, so that at least
the statements of the theorems are completely
algebraic and sit inside of algebraic reality.
In particular, they should be logically provable.
So let's go ahead and lay out precise algebraic
formulations of the fundamental theorems of
algebra. This was actually first suggested in my
algebraic topology series quite some years ago,
so it's really an enormous opportunity that we
open up here, and I'm hoping that some viewers
will take this up because it's an incredible
opportunity for some young people—or maybe
not-so-young people—to make a really serious
contribution to mathematics. This particular
theorem especially is of fundamental importance
in mathematics; it really is a pillar of algebra,
as the name suggests. It's crucially
important, and so it's very, very,
very important that we have a solid formulation
and proof of it. Currently, we don't have that,
so this is an enormous opportunity for some young
people to become rich and famous on these grounds.
Okay, so this is really among the foremost
challenges in pure mathematics in the current era,
and I think it's probably not much of
an exaggeration to say that proving
this result—really getting it on a firm
basis—would be as important as any other
single mathematical accomplishment in the
20th century. It really is at that level;
it's a foundational-level kind of challenge—very,
very important. So, maybe you can do it.
Alright, so our challenge is to
set up this framework in a purely
algebraic way—so really relying on
the basic operations of addition,
multiplication, subtraction, and
division. No transcendental processes,
no infinite processes being completed,
so none of that implicitly under the rug,
surreptitiously. Everything squared away logically
with a finite number of arithmetical steps.
Okay, so the setup is that of rational complex
numbers. These are not the usual complex numbers;
these are actually the true complex numbers. So a
rational complex number is one—it's an expression
of the form a + bi where a and b are rational
numbers. This is a rather quick way of introducing
rational complex numbers. We will also, in a
little while, show you some other ways of thinking
about these things that are perhaps more intuitive
or in the line of data structures, but for now,
this is familiar enough, I think, to most people:
a + bi, where a and b are rational numbers. That's
the critical point. So these things can be
added in the usual kind of way, and they can
be multiplied in this particular way, which really
amounts to the rule that i times i is -1. This bi
and this di become -bd. This creates a field—we
won't say precisely what that means—but a field
with the name rat(C), or rational complex numbers,
which contains the rational numbers in the special
case when the coefficient of i is zero. In that
case, we get something which is a rational number,
so we can think about the rational complexes
as being an extension of the rational numbers.
While historically complex numbers were
problematic, when it became apparent that
there was a two-dimensional representation
of them, then it was a little bit easier for
people to visualize them and understand them.
So this is sometimes called the Argand plane,
where we take the usual xy-plane and identify
the y-axis with the i-axis. So we have usual
rational numbers here and multiples of
i in that direction. That allows us to
visualize a complex number like 3 + 2i as 3
in this direction and 2i in this direction.
So it really corresponds to the point
(3, 2) in sort of an affine sense. So
we can visualize rational complex numbers
as points in the familiar affine plane.
And now here is the main measurement notion
that we'll need. The quadrance of a rational
complex number z, which is a + bi, is the rational
number q(z) which is a² + b². So a² + b²—that's
the quadrance between these two points in
the usual two-dimensional Euclidean plane.
Remarkably, this quantity doesn't really get
officially defined in a complex analysis course,
which is really quite astounding because
it's an absolutely central and fundamental
notion. Unfortunately, most treatments
of complex numbers start by saying,
"Let's immediately take the square root of this
and call this the absolute value of the complex
number." We do not want to do that, okay? We do
not want to use absolute value in this context,
which is the square root involved—really an
infinite process. You have the square root of,
in this case, for example, 9 + 4, 13—the square
root of 13—that's not something that you can
access in a standard way with only a finite number
of arithmetical steps. The quadrance, which is
just 13, is of course very easy and pleasant to
work with. So that's a big adjustment that one
ought to make when studying complex numbers. So
think about quadrance rather than absolute value.
And two very important and useful facts about
quadrance: first of all, that the quadrance
of a complex number z is 0 precisely when z =
0. So it goes both ways—if the quadrance is 0,
then the complex number is 0, and it’s
easily seen that if the complex number is 0,
then its quadrance is 0. And this is probably the
most important fact about complex numbers from
an elementary point of view: the fact that the
quadrance is multiplicative—that the quadrance of
a product z times w with two rational complex
numbers is the product of q(z) times q(w).
Okay, so we're not going to go too far in
this direction for now. The main thing is to
understand that we can expand polynomial algebra
or arithmetic from polynomials with only rational
coefficients to polynomials involving complex
coefficients, and we can replace the idea of
plugging in rational values with the idea
of plugging in rational complex values. So,
for example, here in a polynomial P(z) = z⁵ - 2z
+ 3, if, for example, we substitute the complex
number 1 - ½i, we can sub that in here—that would
involve taking the fifth power of this thing,
subtracting 2 times this, and adding 3. And
one can check that the result of that is the
complex number -3/16 - 9/32i. So, for example,
if we were looking for a zero of this polynomial
regarded in this complex setting, then this
would not be a zero because the polynomial
evaluated at it is not zero. But if we
manage to find a such a complex number
such that we do get zeros, then that would
be a zero—a root—of the complex polynomial.
Okay, so now these true fundamental theorems
of algebra statements that we're interested
in—they really are going to be purely algebraic.
So we want statements that are purely algebraic,
like they can be understood in principle
by a primary school student. No calculus,
no analysis, no complicated functions—we
just know how to add, multiply, subtract,
and divide, and they have learned a
little bit about these complex numbers.
Okay, so there are going to be several such
theorems. In the same way as in the previous
video, we had two different theorems—here,
there will be two different theorems as well,
and they have some increasing sophistication. And
I want to reiterate this very important point:
we have no proper proof of these statements.
None of the many, many proofs that have been
given are logically correct because they
all implicitly, one way or the other,
assume somewhere or another infinite
processes. But one way or the other,
if you look at all the proofs, they're all
doing this, and we want to avoid that. We
want to understand the situation so deeply that
we can see the essential algebraic aspects of
them. So this is an incredible opportunity
for smart, careful, and precise thinkers.
Now, 50 years from now, people will
be jealous of you for having this
opportunity to be able to prove such an
important, crucially important theorem—an
absolute foundational aspect for people—all of
algebra. That’s waiting for us in the future,
that’s to come. Maybe some of you
can be involved. Very exciting!
Alright, so here's the first true
fundamental theorem of algebra,
and it's necessarily a little bit more
complicated to state than the usual one
because it's more precise and pins things down
more carefully. And so we pay a little bit of
a price for being more accurate and staying
in the algebraic world. So, what is it? For
any non-constant polynomial P(z) = a₀ + a₁z +
... + aₙzⁿ, we'll assume that this aₙ is not
equal to 0 with n greater than or equal to 1. So
this non-constant means that the degree of this
polynomial is at least 1, and these coefficients
a₀, a₁ up to aₙ are all rational complex numbers.
Given such a polynomial, and given a natural
number K which is bigger than or equal to 1,
the statement is that there is a w
= a + bi, a rational complex number,
with the property that the quadrance
of P(w) is less than or equal to 1/K.
So you're given a polynomial, and then someone
says, "Let's choose K = 10" or whatever—there's
some particular K chosen—and then your job is
to find an approximate zero, not really a zero
but an approximate zero. What does that mean? It
means a complex number—a rational complex number,
crucially—so that when you plug it into the
polynomial, you get this other complex number
P(w), and when you take the quadrance of that,
it's small. The quadrance being small means that
the complex number is close to zero. Well, close
in the sense that its quadrance is at most 1/K.
Okay, so let's have a look at an example
because we like explicit, concrete examples.
Here is a polynomial P(z) = z⁶ + 3z² + z + 1.
In the ordinary, say, rational number domain,
this is what the graph looks like. It has some
kind of shape like this, and it's quite clear
that it's not going to cross the x-axis, so it
doesn't have a traditional zero. At times gone by,
people would have said, "This function doesn't
have a zero." But over the complex plane, we have
a wider story, and we can get some approximate
zeros at least. So let's see how that works.
So the ingredients for the fundamental
theorem of algebra part one as we've set
out are a polynomial like this together
with some resolution level K, say K = 30.
So if we're given these two quantities, then
we want to find a complex number w = a + bi,
crucially a rational complex number, such that
the quadrance of P(w) is less than or equal to,
say, 1/30. So we want that when we plug this
thing into here, we're getting a complex number
which is in quite a close proximity
to zero—within the quadrance of 1/30.
Okay, so I have found such a zero for you,
and here it is: it's -1/6 + 1/2i. If we take
this complex number and plug it in here,
we calculate the sixth power and so on,
and make this calculation, then we get
this complex number 127/729 - 13/648i.
And if we call that thing v, then this
complex number v has quadrance—well,
it's that thing squared plus that thing squared,
and that turns out to be this: 1045945/34012224.
Let me kind of line them up here so you can kind
of see it's basically like 1/34, and that's just
a little bit less than 1/25. So if our K value
was 25, then this would be a linear factorization
of the polynomial which is approximate, but
which is within the resolution of K = 25.
I think it's quite interesting. I think the
numbers are interesting. I think it's pleasant
and also curious that the zeros that we're
getting here are relatively simple fractions,
right? They're not very big. This is
a reasonably decent-sized polynomial,
and it’s curious that we can get to this
pretty good approximation because actually,
the sum of all these five or six quadrances
is for a total of less than 1/25. We're
doing pretty well with relatively
simple-minded factors, you might say.
Which brings us to the interesting question: okay,
so just how—how can we generalize this kind of
thing? You know, given this polynomial, and we
understand its coefficients, given a K value,
how complicated do these zeros have to be?
In other words, how big are the numerators
and denominators typically going to be so that
we get within the resolution required? This is
an example of a different kind of question
that arises when we give up on our abstract,
theoretical, pie-in-the-sky kind of explanation
of what's going on and return to a more concrete,
computational, "let's see what actually
happens" point of view. So we give up on
the dreaming, we face the reality, but more
interesting questions arrive. We see more;
we get in more contact with real mathematics.
So I'm hopeful that's what we'll do—finding
proofs for these theorems, that those proofs
will have a strong computational bias. I think it
will involve having more insight than we currently
have. So if you're aspiring to prove these
things, the first thing you should do is have
a good look at the classical proofs. There are
a lot of great ideas in those classical proofs,
okay? You will want to understand the basic ideas
there—there are all these topological ideas—and
then you want to wrestle with how you’re going
to restate those topological arguments without
making all these real-number assumptions about
continuity, and how you can get it down to just
algebra. So it’s a very major challenge. I
think it really is probably useful to keep in
mind this computational question. It's not just a
question of proving these things, but really what
we'd like to do is to have some understanding
of how we find those zeros. Given a polynomial,
given a K, how do we actually find an approximate
zero of that degree of accuracy? What do we have
to do? Can we actually give a computational
proof of these theorems? That really matters.
And I also want to mention that there’s another
challenge lurking in the background. After you
start thinking about this for a little while,
you'll realize that the first two theorems that
I've given you are not the end of the story.
There are naturally some further extensions
that you want to enunciate and then pin
down. So I'm not going to say what those
are at this point—I might do later on,
maybe in my algebraic calculus course,
which I'm thinking about and sort
of slowly working on. But anyway,
there are some fundamental theorems of algebra
part three and part four that are sort of out
there that are worth investigating, and I'll
leave it to you to figure out what those might be.
So I know that there will be a fair number of
mathematicians who are not going to be happy
with this new direction. It’s destabilizing;
it's disconcerting to realize that something
that you had accepted for a long time was
in fact not really entirely correct—that
there's this major logical gap there.
But nevertheless, it's an opportunity
for a lot of invigorated discussion and
development in the subject, I think.
In our next video, I want to talk a little
bit more about the fundamental theorem and
its applications to algebra—in particular, how
it changes our point of view towards fields.
And I want to have a look at a very specific
example coming from roots of unity and so-called
cyclotomic fields. I'll be able to do that without
a lot of background, and that will give you a good
understanding of why we really need to think
about algebra in a majorly different way now
that we sort of understand these difficulties
with the fundamental theorem of algebra.
So I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music